Very exciting. Thank you, Madame
President. Uh it was made abundantly
clear to me at the onset of my tenure a
year ago with MCPS both in community
meetings and also by the board the
importance of safety and security in our
schools. And uh I'm delighted to uh
bring forward our team uh for the third
installment on our safety and security
update. Uh the collaborative efforts of
our teams to coordinate safety plans and
strategies that impact individual
facilities within their communities are
crucial to the positive outcomes and
providing a sense of security for our
schools. Through the use of data,
today's discussion will reflect what
we've learned this year and the
direction in which we are moving to
strengthen our safety across MCPS. There
is some encouraging data that I am
excited that we get to share today. By
dedicating our attention to these
critical areas, we can reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to fostering a
safe environment for all students and
adults who enter our campuses. And with
that, I turn things over to Mr. Marcus
Jones and Dr. Peter Moran, who will
share details about uh how our district
is moving forward with safety and
security.
Thank you and good afternoon to the to
the board and to Dr. Taylor. Uh it's a
pleasure for us to be with you today to
uh discuss our safety and security
update for this past school year. And um
we have uh interesting information to
share. Um, first and foremost, I just
want to uh remind the board of this uh
visionary statement that uh was prepared
um and really that we have uh focused
again on the the second paragraph I
think which is vitally important um on a
comprehensive
and balanced approach that emphasizes
the prevention, the intervention and
consistency across our entire district.
and that has been really the focus of
many of the operations in which we have
held uh steadfast with throughout this
particular school year. Um again uh this
is the third and the final safety
security update to the board and also
coming up on the completion of my first
year um in this uh role. Uh you will
hear in this pre presentation what has
occurred this year. Uh we've delivered
on promised initiatives including uh um
working with uh schools on the student
ID program, catching up on broken
technology
about the 966 student infractions that
impact school safety, giving the board a
closer look into the incidents that
happened across the district and at the
school level this year. fighting knives
and other weapons and drugs and control
dangerous substances were our highest
across the district. A clear picture is
also uh going to be uh explained of the
124 student arrest for incidents that
occurred on campus. And we want to make
sure that we clarify the difference
between full custody um of these
particular offenses as well as the
referrals that are provided to the
department of juvenile services in order
to uh to rectify these particular
incidents.
We also in this presentation we want to
discuss how we plan to create a safe
safer learning environment in FY26
through consistency, high expectations,
and more coordinated efforts including
the student student code of conduct,
technology, and a national emergency
response protocol.
As I conclude the end of my first year,
it was important for me to learn MCPS,
what's working, and what needed to be
done to really support Dr. Taylor's
focus on creating a safe learning
environment. I knew entering this role,
collaboration
with all offices, especially Dr. Moran's
and Dr. fields teams and across
agencies, Montgomery County Police and
our other law enforcement and public
safety partners, Street Outreach
Network, Maryland Center for Safe
Schools was going to be a critical was
going to be critical to lay a foundation
for the safety and security work in this
district. You will hear that as a theme
in my update, but also throughout this
discussion. And this has made a
difference in our work. This year, in
collaboration with Dr. Moran's team, we
completed school safety walks at all of
our high schools. And we are currently
visiting our middle schools
to gain a baseline of safety practices
and a true understanding of
district-wide needs.
Later in this presentation, I will share
more information about the learnings
from this process and what we will do to
address the challenges.
We also implemented some consistent
practices across the district to
increase predictability and make safe
safer learning environments. This
includes
again all high schools have fully
implemented the student and staff IDs
which include wearing and checking for
them. Now, there are processes in place
at our schools. What I would like to see
is to still see a con more consistent
model for for the district from the best
practices um for student IDs.
Next will be our Halo smart sensors have
been installed and are active in all
high school restrooms creating a
deterrent to vaping in these locations
and also signaling if there is a large
commotion.
Though in the first few months of imple
implementation,
student awareness has been increased and
an enhanced focus has been placed on
restrooms by all staff. in discussion
with our high school principles and
security assistants. The biggest
challenge so far is the larger number of
false notifications.
We are working with our vendor to
determine how to balance device
effectiveness and more accurate
notifications to decrease this response
for the coming school year.
We have cleared an estimated 85%
of a significant backlog of security
related technology requests for new or
broken items from multiple years that we
worked in conjunction with technology
and school administrators to ensure that
these items were complete or close to
completion.
We strengthened emergency response
protocols based on what we learned
throughout the year.
On April 3rd, all administrators
participated in mandatory training to
support the consistency of protocols and
provide enhancements to processes.
Two key upgrades focused on
communication,
providing principles the autonomy to
activate a shelter in place or lockdown.
Standardized use of the Remind app to
communicate with students, parents, and
faculty. and communications will support
I'm sorry comms will support
communication efforts to allow the
school staff time to focus on the safety
of the site and managing the incident.
I'm sorry I've missed a couple of uh
slides there. I want to go back. Um
let's go back.
Here we go. Okay. Sorry about that. Um,
a large focus of my first year
again was gained to gain was to gain an
accurate baseline of the district's
safety practices and needs to develop a
direction forward and make our schools
safe. To do this, in collaboration with
Dr. Dr. Moran, we completed these
secondary school safety walks. This was
important to see again what is happening
in our schools and to learn from
principles and security staff the best
practices and challenges. We visited the
schools. We talked and walked with the
principles and their security staff.
What we learned from the high schools is
that overall there is a very strong
collaboration between administrators and
security staff and security teams are
active and not just reactive.
Though each school is unique, our
approach again should be consistent
across our schools.
The board has asked for more accurate
and transparent data
about student arrests. In collaboration
with Montgomery County Police, we did
this. This year, the data is more
accurate.
The data is more accurate identification
of our students race and gender. And I
want to thank the Montgomery County
Police Department for this information
and providing a deeper analysis.
The data on the slide shows
120 uh I'm sorry 124 total arrests for
offenses that occurred on school
property. we have included the full
custody arrest and the DJS referrals
whereas in the past uh the the report to
the board only included the full custody
arrest on campus.
Uh so the difference is as you can note
is that again that the full custody
arrest notes that it's a student that's
physically taken into police custody and
this is done um also within the realms
of the memorandum of understanding that
we have with the police department. The
DJS referrals, that is again the
Department of Juvenile Services. These
are reports where police does not have
the power to make an arrest but has
enough probable cause to charge a
student with an offense that occurred on
campus. Those cases are then sent to
through the police department to the
department of juvenile services which at
that point makes a decision on whether
cases should be sent to a diversion
program or those cases are sent to the
Montgomery County State's Attorney's
Office for prosecution. That data is not
kept within MCPS
security.
Um though police also provided this
double check uh provided this data. We
double checked as their reporting
standard about race and ethnic
ethnicity.
Sorry I got tongue tied a little bit.
Does not align with how um MCPS
identifies it in synergy. So for
example, Montgomery County Police does
not treat uh Hispanic/Latino
as a race and u ethnicity. they uh is
this through their reporting figures. It
is they do it through the FBI standards.
Um so again, it is usually um it is a
it's white and it's black. Um and if it
is of Latino descent, those those are
then uh deciphered out from that
perspective. Okay.
Um
again, this shows the physical arrest
numbers. Um you can see in 2022 to 23
that the numbers were 57.
Um going into 23 to 24 uh the numbers
decreased to 14. These are again in
custody arrest. Um and then this
particular school year as of the May
21st date of 2025
we have seven uh physical arrests for
this current school year. Okay.
Um
looking ahead uh we want to talk about
again uh next year we will fully adopt a
stand uh the standard response protocol
from the I love you guys foundation. Um
this is a nationally recognized model
designed to enhance school safety and
crisis response.
This model also includes parent child
reunification.
This model is is easier to understand
and provides clear consistent language
for students, staff, first responders,
and parents during emergencies.
All school-based administrators will be
trained at the August ANS. All school
staff will be trained during pre-ervice
week and families will receive
information at the start of the year.
All schools will receive correspondent
signage to display throughout their
building and literature to explain to
families that will be in multiple
languages.
And from my safety walks, discussion
with principles and overall assessment
of MCPS
school safety needs. There are two major
initiatives for next year that will
standardize school safety. One will be
mandatory training for our security
staff.
It is really important to me that our
security assistants don't just have
technical training such as CPR and
deescalation practices, but that they
are able to apply it and effectively
navigate the nuances that occur in the
schools.
Our securities must have a professional
development track that will increase
consistency and practices across all
schools. give them a level of confidence
to be proactive and make decisions on
the spot and in the best interest of
safety for the learning environment.
Next year there will be two forms of
mandatory training for security
assistance. I believe these training
structures will make a difference.
First, we are implementing a two-day
onboarding program for any new security
assistant. our security assistant
changing to a different school. Day one
will include
review of emergency preparedness, the
cell phone policy, legal guidelines, and
collaboration with the CEOs.
Day two will be on the job training at a
school with other security assistants,
cluster coordinators, and a panel
discussion with their peers.
The second form of mandatory training
will be quarterly hands-on learning
opportunities by cluster.
The security assistants from a cluster
will come together once a quarter to
walk through a school, do peer
reflection and learn coverage and
practice. They will also share
information about the what is occurring
in their particular clusters at other
schools that also may impact their
school and the school population.
Again, this will be led by our cluster
security coordinators who also who are
members of the cross functional teams
and will know specifically the needs of
each school team and the trends in the
cluster.
The second is a strategic and
predictable approach to technology
infrastructure.
While we were able to clear the backlog
of requests and needs and were able to
outfit all elementary schools with
cameras within the last 3 years along
with looking into other counter measures
counter measures to support our schools
uh building infrastructure through a
multi-year
modernization plan aligned with industry
standards.
This approach will allow will also allow
MCPS to have a long range fiscal outlook
on the cost and the upkeep and determine
if funds are associated with the
operating capital improvement or grant
funds.
At this time, uh I will pass it to Dr.
Moran who will talk more specifically
about student infractions that impact
student safety.
All right. Thank you, Chief Jones. All
right. So, we showed the board a uh
similar chart in January when we did our
uh midyear uh check-in with you uh
regarding serious incidents. So, this
chart uh shows the top student
infractions that disrupt the school
operations. I want to just make sure
that you recognize it does not include
all infractions like cutting class
disruption, inappropriate use of
personal devices, or incidents that um
require medical attention. um or medical
emergencies that do not directly impact
school safety. Uh I want to provide some
context also regarding serious incidents
or infractions that impact the school
safety and specifically just pull the
language right from our policy. Right. A
serious incident is any event on school
property or during a school-related
activity that poses a significant
concern to safety, health, security, or
discipline and may involve an emergency
response, police involvement, or impact
normal school operations. So, right here
on this slide, we are looking at
specific serious incidents that account
for the top five infractions impacting
school safety. These in incidents are
possession of a knife, bomb threats,
fighting or attack on others, drugs or
controlled substances, and trespassing.
For these specific infractions, there
were 1,069
during the 2023 uh 2023 2024 school
year, decreasing to 966 infractions this
school year. With over 160,000
students attending Montgomery County
Public Schools, I think it's important
to consider the low number of these
infractions. We have students for the
most part that are doing a fantastic job
making great choices every day at
school. Trends within the data are
similar to last year. It's important to
highlight that these specific
infractions here have been an overall
decrease of nearly 100 from last year to
this year. notably a reduction in the
number of serious fights and attacks
while we saw a slight increase in false
alarm or bomb threats. I want to be
clear again that this data does not
include all fights that occur in our
school system. Serious fights according
to our policy are categorized as those
that result in physical injury, require
police intervention, or are significant
disruption to school operations. In
accordance with the memorandum of
understanding that we have with the
Montgomery County Police Department, if
a physical attack on another student or
adult that requires a medical attention
outside of the school health room,
schools are required to engage with our
police partners. This engagement and
level of injury are the key factors in
defining a serious fight.
Can you help me out, Marcus? Go to the
next slide. Thanks. A little far reach
for me. All right. All right. Right. So,
this next slide provides a breakdown of
the type of student infractions by
school level, elementary, middle, and
high. Right here, we're looking at
elementary schools. Uh the most uh that
that significantly impact daily
operations and overall school climate.
The infractions presented in this pie
chart um don't just reflect student
misbehavior, they represent real
disruptions to teaching and learning and
often require adult intervention,
behavioral support, or even external
resources. The most prevalent infraction
here is physical aggression. This is not
unexpected de developmentally, but when
left unressed, it escalates into
patterns. And as I shared, we are
focused on prevention and high
expectations for our students. As we
discussed in um in a previous uh
presentation and discussion, other
concerns like disruption impact the
learning uh environment for all
students, often prompting the need for
team- based interventions or support
from behavioral specialists. Next slide.
So here we're looking at middle school.
All right. So we see some concerning
data here with our middle schools. Um
middle schools the data shows rising
trends in disrespect, fighting and
knives and weapons. We see an increase
in fighting and weapons related
incidents, particularly knives or other
objects. This level often presents
higher behavioral volatility, meaning
our middle schools need robust
restorative structures, consistent
routines, and proactive student support
teams. I will say, you know, um to
connect with uh what Dr. Taylor said
about our our school leadership uh
academy, our summer leadership academy,
this was a significant piece of uh
discussion today about restorative
approaches um specifically at the the
middle school level. Uh middle school is
a critical time for us to identify
development um developmentally and um
you know of course boundary testing from
our students. So consistent structures
are especially important here. If we go
to the next slide Marcus. Thank you. All
right. So now we get to high schools. In
high schools the most serious
infractions uh emerge threats weapons
possession drugreated behavior and
physical altercation. These are the
types of incidents that most often meet
the threshold of a serious incident as
defined by our uh policy in Montgomery
County Public Schools and with our
memorandum of understanding with
Montgomery County Police Department.
They often involve interventions and
support and disrupt normal school
operations. All this data as well as the
data Chief Jones shared help drive
decisions around where to place
additional security, deploy cross
functional teams, and provide mental
health and behavioral support uh needed
for our schools. we go to the next
slide.
So, a major next step is the revised
student code of conduct. As we've
discussed previously, launching in the
2025 2026 school year, the revisions um
are the to clarify behavioral categories
and definitions, prioritize preventative
and restorative practices, and provide a
revised response matrix and standardized
investigative process across all 211
schools. I'm happy to report that all of
our administrators, principles,
assistant principles, assistant school
administrators, central office staff,
all received this training uh over the
past 2 days and it was actually very
wellreceived. A lot of great questions,
went through scenarios with all of our
principles um to really process through
and talk about best practices and a lot
of these incidents. Um, these re re uh
revisions reaffirm our commitment to
safe, equitable learning environments,
clear behavioral expectations, and
strong partnerships between schools,
students, and families. We will focus on
restorative approaches. Like I shared
last month, this is not just a practice.
It is a mindset. Our our updates move it
from a strategy to a central component
of our disciplinary approach. In the
operating budget, you'll see the new
office of student conduct and appeals.
The addition will support our system
accountability by ensuring school-based
actions are reviewed with fidelity to
policy and legal guidelines. When
applied with fidelity, restorative
approaches rebuild trust, promote
accountability, and repair harm in a way
that punitive measures often cannot. We
are investing in ongoing professional
development to ensure staff are equipped
to lead restorative conversations to
help students take meaningful ownership
of their actions. Again, not calling in
a squad of people to help, but as Dr.
Taylor has talked about teaching people
to fish, teaching restorative approaches
so that they become a natural part of
every school's culture. All school-based
staff will receive training on the
updated student code of conduct,
including restorative practices
practices and tiered behavior responses
as part of the required annual
compliance modules. Uh just as I said,
they we did receive um training today
from all of our principles. Schools will
embed discussions of the new behavior
expectations during student orientations
the first week of school. We are making
it a mandated expectation across all of
our schools that this information is
covered with every single student the
first week of school. Not the second
week of school, the first week of
school. Um really trying to make it a
digestible information as well. not
going through that um elaborate document
but pulling out the uh the main ideas,
main changes to ensure that everyone
walks away with exactly the same
information. Um again, home room lessons
advisory is also an opportunity to do
this to ensure students understand their
rights, their responsibilities, and
potential consequences. Families will
receive information through multiple
platforms, including printed guides,
schools newsletters, websites, and
community info sessions to reinforce a
shared understanding and partnership in
student success. As we look forward to
FY26, we're expanding our commitment to
school safety through full
implementation of the standard response
protocol at every school, which we
introduced to our principles today. So,
we're we're using our runway very
intelligently to um begin those
conversations before we even flip over
so that they have that information to
begin to talk with their um
instructional leadership teams and staff
about revised student code of conduct
with new training for all staff.
Additional training for security
assistants and administrators on
restorative approaches and incident
deescalation and enhanced monitoring
through our new student conduct and
appeals office. Um lastly, just want to
say our our cross functional teams will
support implementation, gather
school-based feedback, and help problem
solve in real time uh real time. We have
made um important progress, but true
safety means every single student feels
seen, supported, and ready to learn. Our
shared responsibility is to continue
aligning our practices, policies, and
people toward that goal.
Next slide.
All right.